ELSEVIER Physica D 103 (1997)169-189 PHYSiCA Computational mechanics of cellular automata: An
example James E. Hanson a,,, James P. Crutchfield b, l a Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Rd.,
Santa Fe. NM 85701, USA b Department of Physics. Univer~it 3, of California. Berkeley, CA 94720. USA
Abstract We illustrate and extend the techniques of computational mechanics in explicating the
structures that emerge in the spacetime behavior of elementary one-dimensional cellular automaton
rule 54. The dominant regular domain of the cellular automation is identified and a domain filter is
constructed to locate and classify defects in the domain. The primary particles are identified and a
range of interparticle interactions is studied. The deterministic equation of motion of the filtered
space-time behavior is derived. Filters of increasing sophistication are constructed for the
efficient gathering of particle statistics and for the identification of higher-level defects,
particle interactions, and secondary domains. We define the emergence time at which the space-time
behavior condenses into configurations consisting only of domains, particles, and particle
interactions. Taken together, these techniques serve as the basis for the investigation of pattern
evolution and self-organization in this representative system. 1. Patterns and computation in
cellular automata After more than a decade of extensive research, it has become a commonplace
observation that onedimensional cellular automata (CA) exhibit a striking -- and often perplexing -
diversity of spatio-temporal behavior. The early empirical categorization of spacelime patterns into
four "classes" [1] - loosely based ,m an analogy with those found in continuous-state dynamical
systems - has resisted numerous attempts .at formalization. In many CAs, it is immediately evident
that the system self-organizes into some type of emergent pattern. In other CAs, the structure or
even existence of an emergent pattern is less clear. The question that naturally arises therefore is
how to char- * Corresponding author. Permanent address: IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, P.O. Box
704, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA. I E-maih chaos@gojira.berkeley.edu. acterize the
spatio-temporal patterns that emerge during the CA's evolution. If such a characterization is
possible, it can be used as a basis tbr numerical and analytical tools that discover, analyze, and
filter patterns that emerge in CAs. In [2-5], such methods were developed under the general name of
computational mechanics. Computational mechanics is a synthesis of nonlinear dynamics and
computation theory, which characterizes patterns and structure occurring in natural processes by
means of formal models of computation. Connections between CAs and computation theory have been an
active area of research for some time [6-8]. One major theme of this research has centered around
the problem of designing a CA to behave in some particular way, such as simulating a universal
Turing machine [9], exhibiting particles and computing with them [10,11], performing reliable
computations in the presence of noise [12], or 0167-2789/97/$17.()0 Copyright © 1997 Published by
Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved PII $0167-2789(96)00259-X === page === 170 J.E. Hanson,
J.P Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 a host of other tasks. Computational mechanics, in
contrast, approaches CAs more from the perspective of physical science. Rather than trying to
engineer a CA rule table and construct an initial condition to satisfy some predefined criterion,
computational mechanics attempts to discover and characterize the typical patterns occurring in a
given CA. 2 In a welldefined sense, each CA specifies the local space-time equations of motion of a
model universe, and computational mechanics is addressed to the question: What are the "physical
laws" and structures that emerge in the space-time behavior? A distinction must be made here between
"patterns" and "configurations". Throughout this article, a pattern is considered to be a set or
ensemble of configurations sharing some common spatial structure. Pattern dynamics then concerns the
evolution of sets of similar configurations, rather than of some particular configuration
exemplifying the pattern. If the collection of all patterns is thought of as a pattern space in
which each distinct pattern is a point, then pattern dynamics is the evolution of points in that
space. In many CAs, there are a few important patterns that dominate and organize the behavior of
the system as a whole. These important patterns form a pattern basis i.e., a set of fundamental
components in terms of which all patterns in the system are analyzed [2]. The purpose of this
article is to illustrate the techniques of computational mechanics in a familiar setting. For this
reason we have selected for investigation an elementary CA rule that has received attention in the
past as one of the most interesting and "complex", and whose phenomenology has been at least
partially described already [ 14]. As we will see, computational mechanics can place those results
in a more general amd more rigorous context, as well as opening avenues of further investigation. In
selecting elementary CA 54 to investigate, therefore, we do not focus primarily on the results
themselves, but on the methods of obtaining them. This will facilitate a comparison by 2
Computational mechanics is useful, however, for determining how computations are implemented in CAs;
e.g. see the analysis of evolved CAs in 113]. the reader of the methods of computational mechanics
with its alternatives. In Section 2 we define CAs and the essential elements of computation theory,
section 3 outlines the central concepts of regular domain, domain filtering, and particle
identification in arbitrary CAs. Following this general review, Section 4 describes the fundamental
domain in ECA 54, constructs its domain filter, shows characteristic filtered and unfiltered
space-time diagrams, and derives the deterministic rule governing the time-evolution filtered
space-time behavior. Sections 5-7 describe the primary particles observed in the filtered data,
investigate the basic particle interactions, present numerical data on particle statistics, and
begin the investigation of "higher-order" structures emerging out of the description of the system
in terms of the fundamental particles. 2. Cellular automata and computation theory 2.1. Cellular
automata To fix notation, we briefly recall the definition of a CA. The configuration of the CA at
time t, denoted st, consists of a one-dimensional array or lattice of sites {i = 0 ..... N - 1 }
with values s[ chosen from a finite alphabet .A = {0, 1 ..... k - 1}, so st c .A N. The local
site-update function (a operating on neighborhoods O~ = sti-r ... sti+r of radius r is written St+ 1
The list of all neighborhoods 0 and their corresponding outputs 4~(0) is the CA's lookup table. The
global update operator ci9 : .AN ~ .AN applies 4, in parallel to all neighborhoods in the lattice;
the CA's equation of motion is denoted st+l = ~(st). For finite N, it is also necessary to specify
the behavior at the edges of the array. In the following, we will always use periodic boundary
conditions. The pattern dynamics of a CA is investigated in terms of the CA ensemble evolution
operator, denoted by 4. For any set £t = {st } of configurations (or strings embedded in
configurations), the iterate £t+1 = ~£t is given by £,+1 = [q~(s,):s, c £t/. (1) === page === .I.E.
Hanson, J.P. Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 171 The elementary cellular automata (ECAs)
have k = 2, r = 1. For reference, we list the lookup table of the ECA 54, the rule under
consideration here: qS(r/) = {0, r/ E {111,110,011,000}, 1, r/E {101, 100,010, 001}. (2) 2.2.
Computation theory Before proceeding to the discussion of domains and domain filtering, it is
necessary to review some rudiments of the theory of computation [15]. We will primarily be concerned
with two varieties of finite state machine: finite automata (FAs) and finite state transducers
(FSTs). We will refer to both FAs and FSTs by the generic term machine. An FA consists of a finite
set of states and a transition function specifying directed paths between states. Any state may be a
start state an accept state, or both. Initially the machine is "in" one of its start states. During
operation, it reads symbols one by one from some data source such as a CA configuration - or
alternatively, it may generate symbols internally - and uses those symbols to make transitions from
state to state according to the transition function. The structure of an FA is perhaps best
understood by reference to its graph. The graph of an FA represents its states as nodes and its
transitions as edges labeled with symbols in the alphabet .A. An allowed path in the graph is a
connected sequence of edges that begins at a start state and ends on an accept state. Each such path
is associated with a sequence of symbols (a word) consisting of the labels on the successive edges
traversed. For any given word co, if there exists an allowed path corresponding to that word, then
the FA is said to accept ~o. If there is no such path, the FA rejects co. The set of all words
accepted by a given FA is the language accepted by that FA. The class of languages accepted by FAs
is called the class of regular languages. The FA accepting a regular language 12 is denoted by M(£).
FSTs are a variation of FAs in which the edge labels consist of two parts: an input symbol and an
output string of some length (including length 0). Each path in the graph of an FST is associated
with a sequence of input symbols (the input string) and a sequence of outputs. During operation, the
input string is read in the same way as in FAs; but in addition, the outputs are concatenated to
construct an output string. In this way, an FST implements a particular mapping from strings to
strings. The simple summary is that FAs represent sets, while FSTs represent functions. An important
subclass of FAs is the class of regular processes. A regular process accepts a regular language with
the following properties: (i) subword closure: all subwords of all words accepted by the language
are themselves accepted; (ii) dangler-free: for every word co c £, there is at least one symbol s 6
.A such that cos is also in E; and (iii) the empty set (i.e., a string of zero length) is accepted.
Each of these properties is reflected in the structure of the regular process itself. In particular,
subword closure requires that all states be accept states and that from a start state there is a
branching structure of states and edges devoted to synchronization (or phase-locking) of the machine
to the underlying pattern. In the process graph of a regular process all states are both start and
accept states, and the synchronization states and edges are absorbed into the machine proper. Finite
state machines are appropriate for investigating pattern dynamics of CAs for a number of reasons,
among which we may note the following: (i) FAs encompass the full range of behavior types from
periodic to complex to random; (ii) characterization of patterns using FAs makes possible a
definition of pattern complexity which is both natural and computable in practice; (iii) ensemble
evolution in the space of regular languages is closed under the CA rule; (iv) the CA update rule is
itself an FST; and (v) automated inference techniques exist for reconstructing FAs from experimental
data [ 16,17]. Another advantage of using FAs is that the pattern dynamics of any CA, as represented
by a time sequence of FAs, can be explicitly calculated. If a pattern £t is a regular language, then
its iterate £t+t = PEt is a regular language as well, by point (iii) above. More importantly,
however, M(/~t+l) can be explicitly constructed by means of the "finite machine evolution" (FME)
operator defined in [2]. The FME operator makes it possible to trace the time evolution of any
pattern representable by an FA, even when that === page === 172 J.E. Hanson, J.P.
Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 pattern subsumes an infinite number of words - as is
usually the case. 3. Domains, filters, and particles 3.1. Domains Of fundamental importance in the
pattern dynamics of CAs is the regular domain introduced in [2]. Informally, a regular domain is a
spatially and temporally homogeneous pattern describable by an FA - where "homogeneous" is to be
understood in the sense of having the same regularities. It is a precise formulation of the rather
vaguely defined term "domain" in physics that is generally used to denote some spatio-temporal
region in which "things are basically the same". Wellknown examples include ferromagnetic domains,
in which all spins are oriented in the same direction, and convection cells in Rayleigh-Brnard fluid
flows at the first onset of instability, where a domain is a region of parallel rolls. Besides
characterizing emergent spatial structures, the regular domains of a CA are fixed or periodic points
in pattern space, and as such play an important role in the qualitative analysis of the system's
dynamics. Having outlined a few necessary ideas in Section 2, we can now quote the precise
definition of a regular domain from Ref. [2], as follows. A regular domain A of a CA ¥ is a process
language representing a set of configurations, with the following two properties: (i) temporal
invariance or periodicity: A is mapped onto itself by the dyanmic, i.e., ~PA = A for some finite
period p; and (ii) spatial homogeneity: the process graph of each temporal phase of A is strongly
connected. The latter is a form of spatial translation invariance and is similar to statistical
stationarity or ergodicity of the spatial pattern. In the analysis of CAs, the identification of
domains begins with inference of FAs from examples of the CA's behavior i.e., the discovery of
patterns in space-time data. In simple cases this can be done by inspection. More complex patterns,
and especially patterns containing embedded disorder, usually require the automatic inference
technique of e-machine recostruction [16]. The inferred FAs represent hypotheses or approximations
of the imporant emergent patterns in the system. Once such a pattern has been tentatively
identified, its temporal behavior can be analytically examined using the FME operator. In
particular, it can be tested for invariance or periodicity by direct comparison of M(£) and M(~E),
where the latter is constructed using the FME operator. Similarly, to test for temporal period p,
the FME operator is applied p times to construct M(~P/~), which is then compared with M(E). If the
pattern is temporally invariant or periodic, and if the process graph of its finite automaton is
strongly connected (i.e., it is spatially homogeneous), then the pattern is a domain. The FME
operator, comparison of FAs, and testing for connectivity are fully automated. In this way one can
rigorously prove whether any given FA is a domain of any given CA. If the discovered pattern
consists of spatially periodic repetitions of a basic local configuration, then temporal invariance
or periodicity of the language can be established by following the evolution of a sample
configuration. But for patterns containing aperiodic words, which are quite common in CA behavior,
no finite set of examples can be used to deduce behavior of the language as a whole. In such a case,
the FME operator is essential. 3.2. Filters Having established the existence of one or more domains
for a given CA, a domain transducer (or domain filter) is constructed using a procedure outlined in
[4]. A domain filter is an FST that implements a mapping from arbitrary configurations to strings in
which sites participating in domains and domain walls are flagged with distinct symbols. A domain
wall (or defect) is defined as follows. We consider a domain A and a finite string 09 = zs such that
z c A, s ~ ..4, and w ~A. Then s is a wall of domain A. We will also refer to a group of closely
interacting walls as a defect. The domain filter scans sites in a spatial configuration in a
particular direction (by convention, from left to right), reading each successive symbol of the
configuration and writing a symbol identifying the === page === J.E. Hanson, J.P Crutchfield/Physica
D 103 (1997) 169-189 site by the type of domain or defect. In this way 0 it classifies each site of
a configuration according to which domain or defect it is participating in. In general, the
transducer must read a number of input symbols before any output can be written, in order to gather
enough information to unambiguously identify the pattern; this is called synchronization. When the
transducer encounters a defect, it must resynchronize, t The way in which it resynchronizes is built
into the filter by construction, but in effect it is equivalent to backing up a sufficient number of
sites and starting over. 173 3 3. Particles Even though the domain pattern is temporally invariant
or periodic, a pattern consisting of a defect separating two domains need not be. For example, a
certain type of defect may spontaneously decay into a number of defects of other types, may spawn an
everspreading region of interacting defects, or may even disappear completely. If the pattern
domain-defectdomain is itself temporally invariant or periodic, and if the width of the defect never
exceeds some fixed maximum, then the defect is called a particle. This htst term will be used here
in a specific sense to mean a spatially localized, temporally invariant or periodic boundary
separating two adjacent regular domains. qhe domain-particle~lomain pattern is itself a regular
language. Its FA consits of a copy of the FA for each domain, with additional states and edges
connecting the first domain A i to the second, A j. Note also that although the
domain-particle-domain pattern is temporally invariant or periodic, it is not itself a domain, since
it is not spatially homogeneous: it is not possible t,) reach any state in A i from any state in A
j. Applying the domain filter to each spatial configuration in the space-time diagram of a CA
produces the jSltered space-time diagram. The filtered space-time diagram presents the temporal
evolution of embedded particles against the identified domain "background". From this filtered
behavior, the particle equations of motion and the interactions between particles can be formulated.
What emerges is a hierarchical description of the system in which the fundamental patterns 99 0 i 99
Fig. 1. Space-time diagram of ECA 54, starting from an arbitrary initial condition. Boundary
conditions are periodic. White squares are cells with value s~ = 0; black squares are cells with s~=
1. - the domains - serve as a background upon which particles evolve with their own properties. 4.
The primary domain of ECA 54 3 4.1. The domain Fig. 1 shows a typical space-time diagram of ECA 54,
starting from an arbitrary initial condition on a lattice of 100 cells and iterating for 100 time
steps with periodic boundary conditions. Cells with value s[ = 0 are printed as white squares; cells
with s~ = 1 are black squares. The question computational mechanics poses is this: Is there some
pattern or collection of patterns into which ECA 54 self-organizes? In particular, does ECA 54 have
a regular domain? The answer is yes. We therefore begin the analysis of ECA 54 by describing its
most important regular domain. Since it is spatio-temporally periodic (and its period is small), the
basic pattern is not difficult to discover by visual inspection. Before showing that this 3 Some of
the material in Sections 4 and 5 originally appeared in [51. === page === 174 J.E. Hanson, J.P.
Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 nun nun nun ¥ ¥ ¥ l nun nun nn ¥ ¥ ¥ Inn nun nun Fig. 2. A
protion of Fig. 1 showing the domain A54. Note the spatial phase shift of two cells every two
iterations. pattern satisfies the requirements of a regular domain, let us first describe it is some
detail. Fig. 2 shows a space-time diagram of ECA 54's primary regular domain A54. The domain
configurations are spatio-temporally periodic, with periodicity 4 in both space and time. Note,
however, that the same pattern is repeated after two iterations, spatially shifted by two cells. The
pattern of the top row, and every second row following, is given by the expression (0001)*, denoting
any number of repetitions of the basic string 0001. Similarly, the second row and every alternate
subsequent row are examples of the pattern (1110)*. We can easily express this domain pattern as an
FA M(A54). The process graph of M(A54) is shown in Fig. 3. The graph consists of two disconnected
components, A A (at left) and As, which accept the patterns (0001)* and (1110)*, respectively. Each
component consists of four states, represented by circles, and four labeled edges. All states have
inscribed circles and squares, indicating start and accept states, respectively. Each state is a
distinct spatio-temporal phase of the domain and has been assigned a label in {a ..... h} for
comparison with other machines below. The spatial periodicity of configurations in A54 is evident in
the fact that each component consists of a single loop of edges without branching. The temporal
periodicity of the patterns is schematically indicated by the dotted lines showing the effect of the
CA ensemble evolution operator ~/'54. In this representation, we have explicity discarded all
information about the way in which an individual configuration lines up under its parent. The words
in the language A54 are configurations (or parts of configurations) of the CA. We can think of the
machine M(A54) as scanning the CA lattice from left to right, reading symbols in sequence, and using
each symbol to move from state to state by taking the edge with the corresponding label. So long as
the input string is in A54 , it is always possible to make such a transition. When a symbol
inconsistent with A54 is encountered, no corresponding transition exists, so the machine must stop
operation; the input string is not recognized by M(A54). (An alternate version of M(A54) would have
an extra state into which the machine is driven by each input symbol inconsistent with A54. This
state would have self-loops on both 0 and 1, but would not be an accept state. In this way, all
strings would be recognized, but those not in A54 would be rejected.) The proof that A54 is a
regular domain is extremely simple. Nevertheless, for definiteness we express the result in the
following proposition. Proposition 1. The regular language A54 is a domain of ECA 54 with temporal
period two. Proof The two temporal phases of A54 satisfy the two conditions of a period-two domain:
(1) qb54A a = AB and (P54AA = AB. Recall that q~54 is the ensemble evolution operator for ECA 54,
which iterates each configuration in the language AA or AB. Explicit construction of M(q~54AA) and
M(qb4AB) using the FME operator shows that they are identical to M(As) and M(AA), respectively.
Alternatively, because all configurations in both A A and A8 are spatially periodic, their temporal
behavior can be inferred from the evolution of a single configuration; see for example Fig. 2. 0 ?
Fig. 3. Process graph of ECA 54's domain A54. The component on the left is AA; on the right is A B.
As the dotted lines indicate, they are mapped onto one another by the CA ensemble evolution
operator, q~54. In this and all following graphs of machines, inscribed circles and squares denote
start and accept states, respectively. === page === J.E. Hanson, J.P. Crutchfield/Physica D 103
(1997) 169-189 175 (2) The process graph of each temporal phase is strongly connected; this is true
by inspection of Fig. 3. [] A54 is temporally periodic in two distinct senses. Considered as a set,
A54 has temporal period 2, as the FME operator verifies, and as indicated by the two disconnected
components representing the two temporal phases of the domain. The evolution of a particular domain
configuration, on the other hand, has temporal period 4, as can be seen in Fig. 2. These two
distinct types of temporal periodicity give us an opportunity to introduce the space-time machine
(or path automation) into our set of computational-mechanical tools. A space-time machine is a
finite state machine allowed to scan the CA space-time data by means of either space-like or
time-like moves. In the simplest version, space-like moves are restricted to one spatial direction
only; a space-like move is therefore identical to the move made by the (spatial) domain machine
M(A54) above. Similarly, time-like moves are made only forard in time. Starting from space-time cell
(i, t) with value s~, a space-like move consists of reading the symbol s~ +l and making the
corresponding space-like transition in the machine, which is indicated by the sabscript s. That is,
one follows the transition labeled either 0~ or Is, if s~ +l = 0 or s~ +1 = 1, respectively. A
time-like move consists of reading symbol st+i I and making the corresponding time-like transition,
labeled ~ith subscript t. In this way, the original binary alphabet A = {0, 1} has been expanded to
{0s, 0t, Is, it}. q~hus, the input alphabet for the space-time machine consists of symbols with
space-time path information. The process graph of MsT(A54), the space-time machine for ECA 54's
domain, is shown in Fig. 4. For clarity, we have omitted the states devoted to synchronization.
Symbols with subscripts s and t represent s~te values encountered on a move to the right (spacelike)
or forward in time (time-like), respectively. Note that the two components of A54, AA and A8 are
preserved unchanged as square loops of states connected by space-like edges. The additional
information in MST(A54) is found in the time-like edges between the two components. MsT(A54) gives a
complete characterization of the spatio-temporal pattern identified by Fig. 4. The process graph of
MsT(A54), the space-time machine for A54. States are labled to correspond to those in the (purely
spatial) domain machine M(A54) in Fig. 3. Subscripts s and t on the edge labels represent spacelike
and time-like moves, respectively. Thus, the label 0s represents a symbol 0 encountered on a
space-like move. States and edges devoted to synchronization are not shown. the domain, including
both the temporal periodicity 4 of the configurations and the temporal periodicity 2 of the pattern.
A fuller description of the ideas underlying space-time machines, including methods of inferring
space-time machines from data and of constructing space-time filters, must wait for presentation
elsewhere. 4.2. Domain filtering According to the sequence outlined in Section 3, our next step
after finding the domain is to construct the corresponding domain filter. In doing so, we pass on
from the spatio-temporal description of the domain (i.e., MsT(A54) of Fig. 4) and return to a purely
spatial representation of the domain (i.e., M(A54) of Fig. 3). The domain filter T04 , as
constructed from A54 by the prescription in [4], is shown in Fig. 5. T¡4 is an FST that takes as
input any word s ~ A* and parses it into a sequence of domain and wall labels. In this way, it
recognizes the structures implicit in the spatial configuration $. Two different types of state are
shown in Fig. 5. States without inscribed labels are synchronization states, devoted to processing
the first few symbols in s. The machine starts in the state with the double circle at the top of the
figure, === page === 176 J.E. Hanson, J.P Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 Fig. 5. ECA 54's
domain filter T¡4,~ which maps sites in the domain to 0 and each defect to a unique output in {1
..... 8}. Labeled machine states correspond to the domain states of Fig. 3. then moves along edges
according to the input symbols. The first few input symbols serve to synchronize the machine to the
underlying pattern, driving it from the start state of total ignorance into one of the recurrent
states. The edges are labeled Sin ISout for input (raw configuration) and output (filtered) symbols,
respectively. Note, however, that during synchronization the machine produces no output, which is
signified by putting Sout ---- ~.. During synchronization, the transducer has yet to read a
sufficient amount of information to unambiguously distinguish the domain components and the several
wall types. Once the machine has synchronized, every site read is either in a domain or is a wall.
At this point, the transducer is in the recurrent part of the graph, where it remains for the rest
of its operation. For comparision, asymptotic states in Fig. 5 are given labels corresponding to the
states of the domain machine M(A54). Edges corresponding to sites in the domain are printed in bold
lines and all have output symbol 0. Walls are printed in lighter lines, and have output symbols in
the alphabet {1 ..... 8}. Note that each defect edge has a unique output symbol. O-v- ~.~'~ ~- &i "
~, , 0 i 99 Fig. 6. Space-time data of Fig. 1, filtered with the domain transducer T04 of Fig. 5.
White cells correspond to sites participating in A54; black cells, to sites with values s[ ¥ {1
..... 8}. Applying T¡4 to the raw space-time data of Fig. 1, we obtained the filtered picture shown
in Fig. 6. The domain transducer T¡4 assigns a unique symbol to each type of wall; for clarity in
Fig. 6, however, we have plotted all eight wall types as black squares. In making the filtered plot,
the transducer traversed the lattice from left to right, using the periodic boundary conditions to
wrap around at the end in order to classify the first few sites, i.e., to classify those used for
synchronization. If we were to change the outputs of domain edges from 0 to l, and label each defect
edge with the symbol 0, then T¡4 would implement the same mapping as the transformation function in
[14], As its form indicates, F assigns 0 or 1 to each length 4 subsequence in the spatial
configuration depending on whether the number of 1 s in the subsequence is even or odd. Its
simplicity takes advantage of the facts that (i) all length 4 words in A54 have an odd number of ls;
and (ii) all other length 4 words contain defects. Note that F introduces a spatial shift Ai = --4
in the === page === J.E. Hanson, J.P. Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 177 output by writing
its output over the first symbol in the word, rather than the last. Unlike Eq. (3), however, T¡4 was
constructed by a prescription that applies to any domain language - not just that oi" ECA 54.
Additionally, T¡4 does more than just flag locations of defects; it also performs important
classification of defect type, which we will exploit in the following sections. For example, the
pattern of wall symbols {1 ..... 8} in the filter's output offers sufficient information for
automatic identification of the particles visually evident in Fig. 6. This is the subject of Section
5. 4 3. Equation of motion of the filtered behavior One question that naturally arises at this point
is whether the filtered space-time behavior, like that shown in Fig. 6, is itself consistent with
some deterministic equation of motion. That is, does there exist a mapping ~54 such that T04[~54(s)]
= q~54[T¡4(s)] for all CA configurations s? We know that in the case of ECA 18 and in the case of
arbitrary filtered CA, this is not true. in the former, the filtered behavior is described by a
stochastic equation of motion for diffusive annihilating particles [3]. In the latter, the resulting
filtered space-time behavior often can be described only by a strictly more computationally complex
class of spatial processes called cellular transducers [ 18]. The alphabet of the hypothetical
mapping ~54 is ,,l: = {0 ..... 8}. The set of initial conditions over which ~54 is defined is not
(A')*, however; rather, i~ is the set of possible outputs of T o - its output 54 l, mgua,~e, denoted
by 0 [T54]out. Of course, [T¡a]out C (A')*. By definition, for all CA configurations s c A*, me
filtered string z = ~s)4(s) is in [T¡4]out. ^ To establish the existence of 4~54, we must first
prove the following: lemma 2. On CA lattices with periodic boundary conditions, the domain filter
T¡4 is invertible except on strings without defects. That is, for every filtered 0 ¥ string z c
([T54]out -0 ), there exists exactly one conliguration s c (.4* - A54) such that z = T¡4(s). On
strings without defects, i.e., for z 6 0", T ¡ is 8 to 1 54 ' Fig. 7. Graph of the finite state
transducer Q¡ 4 implementing the inverse of the domain filter T ¡ 54" Proof We show invertibility of
T ¡ by constructing 54 its inverse, denoted by Q¡ 4. In essence, this is done by simply reversing
the order of the edge labels on the graph of T ¡ i.e., replacing label xtv with vlx; 54' - - this
converts input symbols into output symbols, and vice versa. The states devoted to synchronization
are removed and a new synchronization structure, determined by the remaining asymptotic part of the
machine, is substituted in their place. Fig. 7 shows the resulting transducer. The transducer starts
out in its synchronization state and remains there until the first nonzero input (i.e., filtered)
symbol is encountered. That symbol synchronizes it to the input string, and it begins writing output
(i.e., unfiltered) symbols. At the end of the lattice, the filter wraps around the periodic boundary
and continues generating output until the first nonzero input is encountered, i.e., it goes back and
writes outputs for the portion of the filtered data originally read prior to synchronization. The
constraint that at least one defect is present ensures that the transducer will synchronize before
wrapping around. Note that Q¡ 4 is deterministic; i.e., for each input symbol z. c .4', there is at
most one edge with matching input label leaving each state of Q¡ 4. This means that each filtered
string z containing one or more defects, which === page === 178 J.E. Hanson, J.P Crutchfield/Physica
D 103 (1997) 169-189 by assumption is in the set ([T¡4]out - 0"), is mapped to exactly one
unfiltered configuration $ ~ (.4* - A54). If z c 0", then there is no defect by which Q¡ 4 can
synchronize. The unfiltered configuration can be any of the eight length-N domain configurations. []
Using Lemma 2, we can define the mapping that takes a filtered string z t at time t and generates
its iterate zt+l, as follows. If there is a nonzero symbol in zt, we first apply the inverse domain
filter to generate st = Q¡4(zt), then apply the CA rule to generate $t+J = q554(st), then convert
back to the filtered string Zt+l = T04(St+l). If Zt consists of all 0s, then necessarily the
unfiltered string st is in A54; since A54 is a domain, $t+l c A54 as well, implying that zt+l
consists of all 0s. Finally, even though qb54 need only 0 be defined over the set [T54]out, we may
trivially extend it over all of (.4')* by mapping every string not in [T~)54]out to all 0s. The net
result is summarized in the following proposition. Proposition 3. Let {st: t = 0 ..... k - 1} be a
time sequence of spatial configurations generated by ECA 54 on a finite lattice of N sites with
periodic boundary conditions, starting from arbitrary initial condition So. Let {zt = T04(St): t : 0
..... k - 1} be the time sequence of filtered strings constructed from {st }. Then the zt evolve
according to the deterministic equation of motion { T~54 (q354 [Q¡4 (zt)]), : zt c [T¡4]out- 0", (4)
zt+i ~54(zt) = O N, otherwise. Proof Using a simple variation of machine composition [2], it is
straightforward to construct the FST for ~54. Since Q¡4, ~54 and T~54 are all deterministic, so is
~54. This means that the filtered space-time dynamics is governed by an effective equation of motion
that is itself deterministic. The FST for ~54 is given in Appendix A. [] In general, it is always
possible to construct the inverse of an FST; however, that transducer may be nondeterministic, i.e.,
there may be more than one edge with a given input symbol leaving a given state. The inverse of a
transducer T is nondeterministic if T has at least one state in which the same output symbol is
assigned to more that one edge leaving that state. This can happen, for example, for filters of
disordered domains, which have nonzero spatial entropy density. Since the disordered domain from
which the filter was constructed contains states with branching edges, the filter itself contains
states in which more than one input is mapped to the domain output symbol. Since this occurs in the
recurrent portions of the filter, there will be states with more than one incoming edge. In turn, if
the labels of these incoming edges have the same output symbol, then the inverted transducer will be
nondeterministic. When the domain configurations are spatially periodic, as is the case in ECA 54,
there are no such branches, and the domain filter is invertible. Since all CA rules are
deterministic by definition, and since all domain filters are deterministic by construction, whether
~ is deterministic depends solely on whether the inverse domain filter is deterministic. As we noted
above, this is the case for any spatially periodic domain, but not for disordered domains (see for
example the analysis of ECA 18 in [2]). Thus we arrive at the following generaliztion of Proposition
3. Observation. For any spatially periodic domain in any CA, the space-time dynamics of the domain
filter output is governed by a deterministic equation of motion. We end this section by stating a
question that we will not answer here. ~54 is deterministic, but is it a CA? That is, can ~54 be
expressed in a finite radius lookup table? 5. Particles and their interactions 5.1. The fundamental
particles A visual inspection of Fig. 6 indicates that there are three particularly common types of
wall structure in the filtered data: a stationary pattern with temporal period 4 and width
fluctuating from 1 to 3 to 5 cells; a stationary pattern with temporal period 4 and width 2 or 4
cells; and an isolated defect surrounded by 0s, === page === C~ ¥ ¥ nn IIIII ¥ nmu III¥ InI ¥ ¥ n
mnnmIm ¥ IIU III ¥ III ¥ ¥ J.E. Hanson, J.P. Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 ~1 + [IPillll
Illll] I[MII [[]1 (a) (b) Fig. 8. Basic wall structures ("fundamental particles") in spacet~me
patterns of ECA 54: (a) unfiltered space-time diagrams of the three types of particle ~,/3, and y
described in the text; (b) filtered diagrams of the same data, produced by T¡ 4. Domain symbols are
white cells. All defects are shown in black, with tile defect symbol inscribed in white. The
temporal phases of tile particles, chosen by convention, are printed algonside the filtered strings.
moving to the left or right with speed c = 4-1 site per iteration. Fig. 8 shows raw and filtered
plots for each of these three structures, which satisfy the definition of particle given in Section
3. They are assigned the flames ~,/3, and y, respectively. As the figure illustrates, each particle
shows temporal as well as spatial structure. We have therefore assigned a temporal phase to each
particle, which is printed beside the filtered strings. Comparison of the filtered space-time
signatures of these particles indicates that a single defect edge in the domain filter may
participate in the detection of more than one particle. For example, the edges with defect output
symbols 8 and 4 are used during both ot and/3 particle detection, defect outputs 5 and 1 are in all
three 179 particles, and defect outputs 2 and 6 are in both/3 and y particles. Consistent with this
observation, we note that one interpretation of the/3 particle is that phases /31 and/32 are a pair
of colliding particles (y+ + y-). In this interpretation, /30 spontaneously decays into the pair (yc
+, Y0) separated by two domain sites and directed back toward each other. This is seen as the
diagonally placed defect symbols (5, 2) and (1,6), respectively, in the filtered diagram. These then
collide to create a/33. A similar interpretation can be made for c~. This interpretation illustrates
a notable tact about particles as we have defined them: A particle may be composed of interacting
subunits that, in isolation, are themselves particles in their own right. The analogy to atomic
physics is obvious here. More interestingly, in certain cases particles may line up to form "bound
state" patterns that satisfy the definition of a regular domain. We will discuss some examples of
this in Section 6. The general motto of filter construction is, whenever a structure is discovered,
filter it out. Once we have identified particles {or,/3, y +, F- }, we construct a new filter tuned
especially for them. This can be done by direct modification of the domain filter machine, but a
more practical and instructive alternative is to construct a particle filter T~4 that operates on
the output of the domain filter T ¡ classifying sequences of filtered 54' symbols by particle type.
In doing so, we are moving up one level in a hierarchical analysis of the system. At the domain
filter level, all that was recognized was the domain; defects were classified only as deviations
from the domain pattern. The particle filter T 1 further 54 recognizes some of these deviations as
being particles. Each filter performs the same basic type of operation to its input data: it
recognizes and filters particular structures, highlighting still-undiscovered patterns as deviations
from these structures. In the following discussion, T I is first constructed to recognize the three
54 fundamental particles, and then modified to recognize strings arising in interactions between
pairs of particles as well. In constructing T l 54, we will consider a particle to be well defined
only if it is bounded on both sides by at least one domain cell; this prevents misidentification ===
page === 180 ,I.E. Hanson, J.P. Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 of very long strings of
adjacent defects as sequences of adjacent panicles. Each cell identified by T¡4 as part of the
domain is assigned output symbol 0 by T~4 as well, thus preserving the domain filter's recognition
of the domain structure. Each defect cell participating in a particle of a given type is mapped to a
given output symbol, i.e., to one of the symbols {u, fi, F +, F-}. Defect cells that do not
correspond to any of the fundamental particles are left unchanged; that is, the symbol in ..4' = {1
..... 8} is copied to the filter output. This will allow us to examine the output of T~4 for new, as
yet unrecognized, structure. ECA 54's panicles are made up of a finite number of short strings.
Comparison of the particles' filtered strings (Fig. 8) shows that, for example, the string 08880
should be classified as an ot particle, while the string 0880 corresponds to particle ft. On reading
the partial input 08, therefore, the particle filter must defer output until the string may be
unambiguously classified. This effectively builds a queue of finite depth into the filter. Output is
deferred until an isolated particle is recognized (or ruled out), then written as a string in a
single transducer transition. There are 12 strings occurring in all phases of the fundamental
particles. Each of these is built into the structure of the particle filter in the same way. 5.2.
Fundamental particle interactions Having identified the different particle types, we may now
investigate the various interactions among them. For example, near the bottom of Fig. 1 one sees
that the collision of a F + and a V- creates a single ft. All told, there are five possible
interactions between pairs of particles. Figs. 9(a)-(e) show the filtered space-times diagrams of
all five, which are also summarized in Table 1. Perhaps the most obvious feature of Fig. 9 is that
all two-particle interactions ultimately result in patterns containing only the domain and the
fundamental particles. Interactions (a) and (b) show the effect of a collision of a y with an u. In
both cases, the original particles persist, though with spatial and temporal phase shifts, and a new
pair of ys is created. As Figs. 9(a) and (b) show, new strings not corresponding Table 1 Fundamental
interactions among ECA 54's particles (a) u+y---+ y-+a+2F + (b) F ++u~2y-+u+V + (c) fl + y- ~ y+ (d)
F+ + fl ~ F- (e) y+ + ?,- --+ I3 (13 y++ot+y-~ y-+u+y + (g) y+ + fl + F- -+ O Interactions (a), (b)
and (g) induce a spatio-temporal shift in the incident particles, as discussed in the text. Note
that the spatial arrangement of input and output particles is respected by the interaction notation.
0 denotes no particles. Fig. 9. Filtered space-time diagrams of the fundamental interactions among
ECA 54's fundamental particles, as listed in Table 1: (a)-(e) are two-particle collisions; (f) and
(g) are three-particle collisons. Filtering was done with the first version of particle filter T~4
described in the text. The domain is shown as white, the particles {u, r, F +, F } are shown in
black. Defects not corresponding to any of the particles are shown in black and have the
corresponding T04 output symbols inscribed in white. === page === J.E. Hanson, J.P.
Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 181 to any fundamental particle are generated during a few
iterations immediately following the collission, but before long these have condensed back into
particles. Interaction (a) induces a net spatial shift of Ai = -- 1 and a net temporal phase shift
of At = + 1 in the ot particle, and a space-time shift of (Ai, At) = (+l, 0) in the original y-.
Interaction (b) shifts the ot by (Ai, At) = (~-1, +1) and the original y+ by (Ai, At) = (--1,0). If
we neglect for the moment the different values of the defect cells, we see that interactions (a) and
(b) are spatial reflections of each other. Interactions (c) and (d) show the results of a collision
between a fl and a y. The interaction occurs in a single time step, as indicated by the fact that no
new nonparticle strings are generated. Note that these two interactions are also spatial reflections
of each other. Interaction (e) shows the collision of two Vs. Again, the interaction takes place in
a single time step. This interaction is itself spatially symmetric. Generally here, and unlike
several of the interactions found in the q~sync CA of Ref. [19], there is no dependence of the
twoparticle interactions on their relative internal phases. Besides the five two-particle
collisions, Figs. 9(f) and (g) and Table 1 show two simple three-particle collisions. Both of these
interactions are spatially symmetric. Interaction (f) consists of a pair of incoming s colliding
simultaneously with an a. All three particles survive the collision. The ot undergoes a shift of (
~i, At) = (0, +2); the incoming ),s are both shifed by (Ai, At) = (0,--1). Note that the new
filtered s~rings occurring during the interaction are also found in the two-particle u-y collisions
(a) and (b). Finally, interaction (g) shows the annihilation of a/3 by simultaneous collision with
two incoming Vs. One advantage of constructing the particle filter T~4 as described in Section 5.1
is that it is now easy to modify it to recognize interactions among particles as well. There are
eight new strings arising in twoparticle interactions, all occurring immediately after an ~-),
collision. We can include these strings in T 1 54 in the same way as the original particles' strings
were included, assigning the output symbol 8 to all defects in strings unique to ot-y to indicate
the intermediate bound state during the particle interaction. Generally, these modifications take
the form of adding more states 010 010 G "% ............ v' I ~.," t" Other states"~. ..... -'
,not.s .ow. ..j YI ' 8,x ¥ 18 IX ',... ~o¡¡o, o 8Mx "....x..) ? o<!= ¡o=.¡ ¡¡o,¡ Fig. 10. A portion
of the graph of particle filter T14, which maps domain cells to 0, cells in the fundamental
particles to output symbols {c~,/3, F +, V-} and strings occurring in pairwise a-y interactions to &
All other defects are left changed, since they do not correspond to recognized structures. The input
label Z "t denotes all input symbols not found on other edges leaving a given state. Edges
terminating on broken circles actually reconnect to the indicated state at the top of the machine;
they have been displayed in this way for clarity. Note that the number of output symbols in an edge
lable varies from zero (indicated by X) to four. Not shown are the other seven edges leaving state
O, corresponding to input symbols {I ..... 7}. Each of these edges leads to a different group of
states and edges similar to the one shown. and edges to T~4 by a procedure that is readily
automated. The net result is our second and final version of T~4, a portion of which is shown in
Fig. 10. Output 0 indicates a cell in the domain, outputs {oe,/3, F +, y } indicate defect cells
making up the fundamental particles, output 3 indicates defect cells in a-F interactions, and
outputs { 1 ..... 8} indicate defect cells not corresponding to any recognized structure. T~4
operates on output strings of T04 in the same way that T04 operates on raw configurations. The
machine is initially in the state with the double === page === 182 J.E. Hanson, J.P.
Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 circle. Once it reads a domain symbol (0), it synchronizes
to state O, which indicates that the next defect encountered is isolated from any defects to its
left. From state O lead eight edges, one for each of the outputs of the domain filter. Each of these
edges in turn leads to a branching sequence of states and edges that eventually writes as output one
of the particles and resets to state O, or flags an unrecognized defect configuration and resets to
state X. In Fig. 10, this structure is fully indicated only for the edge with input label 8; each of
the other edges leaving state O leads to a similar structure. 5.3. Statistics and completeness of
the particle-level description The filters T¡4 and T~4 embody a description of ECA 54's information
processing structure in terms of the domain A54, particles {u, fl, y+, y-}, and the interactions in
Table 1. We can now apply this pair of filters to space-time data generated by ECA 54, in order to
investigate the extent to which this "particlelevel" description is complete. One simple way of
doing this is to measure the frequency of occurrence of each of T~4's output symbols as a function
of time. If the frequency unrecognized defects (T~4 outputs { 1 ..... 8}) decays to zero in finite
time, or if the ratio of unrecognized defects to particles vanishes asymptotically, then no
asymptotic structures not describable in the particle-level vocabulary exist. The conclusion then
would be that the particle-level description is complete. Fig. 11 shows the fraction of cells in a
CA lattice of size N = 106 which TI4 classified as particles {or, ,8, y+y-}, as fundamental
interactions {8}, or as unrecognized defects {1 ..... 8}, plotted versus time for the first 50
iterations of a random initial condition. The fraction of cells in the domain, not shown in the
figure, increases monotonically from an initial value of 0.4996. The curves for y+ and yoverlay each
other almost exactly. Unrecognized defects 2 and 6 start with the same initial fraction and
disappear on the first iteration; defects 1, 3, 5, and 7 all have equal intital fractions that
vanish by iteration 10. The fractions of defect types 4 and 8 do not vanish, though they are 0.1 | ,
. | i | i I 6 {1,3,5,7} ...... .. i: O¡l! ~, o , o , 0 I 50 Fig. 11. Fraction of the CA lattice
devoted to the fundamental particles (or,/3, F +, F-) to u-y interactions (b), and to unrecognized
defects {1 ..... 8} versus time. significantly lower than all of the particle frequencies. Unless
they decay to zero faster than the particle frequencies, this is an evidence that the
"particle-level" description, as captured by T~4, is incomplete. Unfortunately, the frequencies of
defects 4 and 8 remain within a few orders of magnitude of the particle frequencies out to time t ~
106, and show no sign of vanishing faster than the particle frequencies. As we will discuss in
Section 6, these two defect types occur together, and are created by certain types of multiparticle
interactions usually involving as. Fig. 11 also indicates two epochs of ECA 54's time evolution. For
the first few iterations, the system is self-organizing from a random initial configuration into a
system of particles (and defects 4 and 8). This process is reflected in the wild fluctuations in
particle fractions and in the gradual increase in us. It is notable that these apparent fluctuations
at early times are not due to statistical variation in the random initial condition. We repeated the
experiment several times using different random initial configurations and different lattices sizes,
and the same "fluctuations" were repeated almost exactly - even down to the size and position of the
oscillations in ot frequency. The only discernible discrepancies between the experiments were slight
differences in the size of the oscillations in 3s, 4s, and 8s, starting at about === page === J.E.
Hanson, J.P. Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 183 t = 10 and gradually disappearing
thereafter. As the figure shows, by about r ~ 25 this initial condensation into domains and
particles has been replaced by a slow, smooth decrease in all particle fractions, hich continues
indefinitely. We may, therefore, consider r as an emergence time for the domain/particle slructures.
To measure the asymptotic behavior of the system, be could simply continue the above experiment for
much longer. However, to illustrate the flexibility of our filtering scheme, we will instead make a
simple modification to the particle filter and count the exact number of each type of particle at
each time. This modification consists of changing the output string for each temporal phase of each
particle to contain only one nonzero symbol, while maintaining proper spatial locations.
Unrecognized defects are handled in the same way as in T~4. The resulting machine, denoted by T54,
writes a single nonzero value at the center of each particle, regardless of its width. This makes
counting particles just a matter of counting symbols in the filter output. Fig. 12 shows the number
of particles and a-), interactions versus time plotted on a log-log scale, for the same experiment
but longer times as in Fig. 11. Numerical studies in [14] have indicated that at very long times the
number of as and 8s decreases very slowly according to a power law [N(a) + N(6)] ~ t-', with a =
0.15. Our experiments on lattices of size N = 10 a, I0 5, and 10 6 show the same a-frequency curves
in all cases, with a long-time decay N(a) ~ t a having rate a = 0.10 4- 0.01. As Fig. 12 shows,
however, this long-time scaling regime sets in extremely gradually with a slow downturn beginning at
about t ~ 16000. By about t ~ 2 x 105 , the downturn is completed and the a-frequency curve follows
its longtime power law decay. One experiment on lattice size N = 104 was allowed to evolve for t = 2
x 108 iterations: no systematic deviation from this functional form was observed. The fact that
chaning the lattice s~ze had no effect on the shape of the a-frequency curve shows that the onset of
the scaling regime is not due to finite-size effects. Another statistical measure of the system's
global behavior is given by the fraction f(A54) of sites that 17 log(N) 11 i I i ct "¡.I w 0 Ioglt)
22 Fig. 12. Number of particles {or,/~, V +, ?, } and u-?/ interactions 3 versus time. The lattice
size is N = [06. Logarithms are base 2. The dashed line shows the measured power law decay at long
times. are in the domain. After the initial emergence time, f(A54) shows a very slow monotonic
increase toward a value of 1.0, which corresponds to a configuration entirely free of defects or
particles. In the scaling regime, f(A54) increases as a power law with exponent a --- 0.007 +
0.0005. A further modification of the particle filter provides us with a valuable tool for data
visualization on large space-time scales. Noting that the as are the longestlived of the fundamental
particles, we construct an "atracker," denoted by T 3 which traces the evolution 54' of as to the
exclusion of all other structures. This is accomplished as follows. First we change the particle
filter output to map all ¢~s and ?/s to the domain symbol 0. Then we modify the output on each input
corresponding to an a or an oe-?' interaction so that a single nonzero symbol ( 1 ) is written, in
the same way as in T~4. Unrecognized detects are all mapped to a third symbol (2). In this way,
space-time data filtered with T ¡ and T 3 show a single 1 in the central cell 54 54 of each a,
blocks of 2s on the relatively rare unrecognized defects, and 0s in all other cells. This effects a
vast reduction in the amount of information in the space-time diagram. Fig. 13 shows two space-time
diagrams of a random initial configuration on lattice of 1000 cells, evolving === page === (a) 0 999
9999 0 p o g 0 - t (b) 9999 184 i 7A~gt\! J.E. Hanson, J.P Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189
0 999 Fig. 13. Substantially larger space-time diagrams of ECA 54; each diagram contains 107
space-time cells. (a) Unfiltered space-time diagram. (b) Same space-time diagram filtered with the
or-tracker described in the text. These figures are raster files taken directly from a moderate
resolution computer screen, with an image resolution that is considerably coarser than the cell
size. The importance of domain filtering lbr visualization is especially obvious here. The filtering
effects a data compression ratio of about 103. for a total of 10000 time steps. Each diagram covers
a rather large number of space-time cells - 107. It is interesting to note that even a PostScript
rendered 8.5" ! 11" page contains only about 107 resolvable dots. At the top of Fig. 13 is the
unfiltered space-time data, below which is the output of the a-tracker applied to the unfiltered
data. Filtered output symbols 1 and 2 are both shown in black. Both plots are raster files taken
directly from the computer screen, with an image resolution considerably coarser than the cell size:
a single pixel covers approximately three spatial cells and 33 time steps. Because of this, the
unfiltered data appear as a wash of randomly distributed pixels. The filtered plot, on the other
hand, clearly shows the longlived as moving against a white background. The effective dynamics at
this level is of stable ot particles apparently undergoing a sort of statistical "repulsion"
mediated by the hidden ys. This is somewhat analogous to Brownian motion of the ot particles. At
early times, we see a few annihilative collisions between adjacent ors that draw too close to each
other. These collisons are the cause of the decay in the number of as observed in Fig. 12. After
this transient period, the number of as in Fig. 13 remains constant and they remain roughly
equidistant as they wander about within a close neighborhood. If we were to continue tracking the
evolution of the system, we would see occasional ot--~ collisions occur at increasingly long
intervals, until finite lattice size effects came into play. 6. Secondary structures Besides the
primary domain and fundamental particles, ECA 54 supports a large number of secondary structures,
some having the domain and particles as building blocks, some not describable at the domain/particle
level. This section presents a gallery of a few of these. Our goal at present is not to effect an
exhaustive description of patterns arising in ECA 54, but rather to show how the computational
mechanics analysis of the system facilitates their discovery and description. ECA 54 possesses a
number of regular domains other than A04 . The simplest of these is the language 0", consisting of
all blocks of consecutive 0s. This language is obviously a domain of all CAs that map the all-zeros
neighborhood I1 = 0...0 to 0. But in ECA 54, as in most such CAs, 0* is unstable. Other easily
identified domains in ECA 54 consist of multiple isolated particles of a single type separated by
domain regions - for example, the pattern consisting of === page === J.E. Hanson, J.P.
Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 185 (.) (b) (c) raw filtered Fig. 14. Unfiltered and
filterd space-time diagrams of a few o( ECA 54's other domains: (a) an unstable domain; (b) a domain
consisting of alternating ors and /~s; (c) a domain of "'pseudo-~s" in which every block of nonzero
filtered cells is either part of an ~ or is a string occurring in an ~-y interaction. In the
filtered plots, domain cells are white, particles are black and nonparticle defects are black with T
¡ output symbol. 54 isolated y ~- particles moving against a background of A 0 is a domain. Using
notation borrowed from regu- 54 lar expressions, we may write this domain language as (A64 + y+)*.
Other similar domains include (A54 + ~/-)*, (A54 + u)*, (A54 +/3)*, and (A54 + ot + fl)*. This last
should be understood to mean patterns containing both isolated ~s and isolated fls; both types of
particle may coexist without interacting because they have the same velocity (zero). All these
domains are unstable to perturbations introducing other types of particle with different velocities.
Fig. 14(a) shows a space-time plot of a domain with configurations having spatial period 4 and
temporal period 2. The domain itself is period 1. This domain is unstable: its boundaries always
grow inward with speed c = 1 site per iteration. Initial conditions having spatial regions in this
domain are responsible for the initial nonzero fractions of unrecognized defect types { 1, 3, 5, 7}
shown in Fig. 11. The fast decay in those fractions is due to this domain's instability. A more
complex, and perhaps also more interesting, domain consisting of alternating ots and fls is shown in
Fig. 14(b). Domain configurations have spatial period 9 and temporal period 4. This example again
points out the inherent duality between domains and particles. In certain cases, particles may
coalesce to form domains. The raw configurations can be interpreted in two ways, as the context of
analysis requires. This is similar to raw filtered Fig. 15. Raw (a) and filtered (b) space-time
diagrams of lhe gamma gun. The gamma gun arises t~om the decay of the unstable domain shown in Fig.
14(bL the case of the/3 particle, which could be interpreted as a single entity or as the bound
state of two Vs. Fig. 14(c) shows another unstable domain, in this case consisting of strings
occuring in the ~ particle and in ot-y interactions. The spatial period is 8. The temporal period of
configurations is 6, but that of the pattern is 3. The "gamma gun" (called a "radiating particle" in
[14]), shown in Fig. 15, is a periodic particle formed by the decay of the domain of Fig. 14(c).
When that domain is bounded on both sides by regions of A54, the two boundaries gradually approach
each other while emitting ys that propagate out into the A.s4 regions. If the number of repetitions
of the basic domain string is even (e.g., filtered string ... 0(53108880)"0... with n even), then
the ultimate collision of the two approaching boundaries results in a configuration in the domain
A54, i.e., the secondary domain disappears completely. If the number of repetitions of the basic
string is odd, the ultimate result is the gamma gun. Vestiges of the vansihed domain can still be
seen in the gamma gun's space-time signature. For example, in the eighth row of Fig. 15, the gamma
gun's filtered spatial string is ... 053108880 .... identical to one period of the basic domain
string noted above. Finally, we return to our consideration of previously unrecognized defect types
4 and 8. By construction, === page === 186 J.E. Hanson, J.P. CrutchfieM/Physica D 103 (1997) 16~189
T~4 classifies short blocks of 4s and 8s as follows: blocks of length 1 are u-y interactions, blocks
of length 2 are fl particles, and blocks of length 3 are u particles. This means that unrecognized
4s and 8s can occur in only two cases: (i) isolated blocks of length 4 or greater; or (ii) adjacent
to other defect types (i.e., not isolated). The particle frequency statistics discussed in the last
section show that all other unrecognized defect types vanish in the first few iterations. Therefore,
only case (i) is possible at intermediate to long times. Application of the inverse domain filter Q¡
4 to long blocks of 4s and 8s shows that they, respectively, correspond to long blocks of 0s and 1 s
in the unfiltered behavior. These can arise in a number of ways, the most common of which is when a
pair of incoming parallel ys collides with an u particle, i.e., y+ + y+ + u or u Ö y + y-. Before
the outcome of the first collision has precipitated into isolated particles, the second ), hits the
interaction region, resulting in a block of 8s. Another way in which blocks of 8s arise is when two
or more adjacent us with the same temporal phase are pushed into each other by incoming ys. From the
mapping ~54 for filtered configurations, or alternatively from the CA rule ~P54, we see that a block
ofn 8s bounded by one or more 0s at each end is mapped onto a block of n 4s. Blocks of 4s shrink
over time, though at alternate time steps they also emit short lived ys in the form of isolated ls
0'-) and 5s (y+). The general pattern is shown in Fig. 16. There are four possible outcomes, based
on the initial length n of the block of 8s. If n mod 4 = 0, then !n iterations later the filtered
string will be... 050010 .... which maps to a fl particle by the y+-ycollision shown in Fig. 9(e).
If n mod4 ---- 1, then !n iterations later the filtered string will be ... 0504010 .... which
corresponds to an u particle with temporal phase u i, as indicated in Fig. 8(b). If n mod 4 = 2,
then In iterations later the Fig. 16. Evolution of long blocks of 4s and 8s in the domain filter
output. filtered string will be ...05044010 .... corresponding to the 3-particle collision V + + fl
+ yshown in Fig. 9(g), which results in the mutual annihilation of all three particles. Finally, if
n mod 4 = 3, then I n iterations later the filtered string will be ... 050444010 .... which is
identical to the three-particle collison V + + u + yshown in Fig. 9(f), and results in the three
particles T + u + y+. Differentiating among these four possible outcomes for classification and
filtering is done by calculating n mod 4 and remembering the location of the block's beginning. The
latter requires adding a queue of unlimited depth to the particle filter. This means that a complete
description of the pattern dynamics of ECA 54, whatever else it may entail, requires at least a
computational model including a queue, i.e., a more sophisticated model class than finite state
machines. 7. Particle physics of ECA 54 This article has described a number of properties of
elementary CA rule 54 - some new, some already known - using the unified, general-purpose framework
of computational mechanics. As such, it presents a case for the utility of that framework, by
showing how otherwise disparate calculations and results can be brought together under a single set
of techniques, and by presenting new results that would be otherwise inaccessible, or at best ad
hoc. The analysis of ECA 54's patterns and pattern dynamics began with the identification of its
most important computationally homogeneous pattern, the regular domain A54. From this basic building
block or "pattern basis", a domain filter was constructed to factor out spatio-temporal regions
conforming to the domain patterns, locating and highlighting exactly those space-time cells at which
defects in the pattern occur. The resulting filtered space-time data were found to be described by
the iteration of a deterministic mapping. A second-level particle filter was constructed to
automatically classify the important particles or coherent structures existing at the boundaries of
domain regions. Straightfoward modifications to the particle filter enable it to recognize and ===
page === J.E. Hanson, J.P Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 classify patterns of all
fundamental interactions, and ultimately of all but an exponentially small fraction of asymptotic
spatio-temporal behavior. In describing A54, we were also able to introduce the space-time machine,
an important extension to the techniques of computational mechanics, and present as an example the
space-time machine corresponding to ECA 54's fundamental domain. Clearly the ideas underlying the
space-time machine and its relatives deserve extensive treatment; this must out of necessity be
presented elsewhere. We conclude by elaborating on a point made in the introduction: computational
mechanics, in contrast with much work concerning CA and computation, takes a distinctly naturalistic
stance. Each CA rule may be regarded as a specification of the microscopic equations of motion of a
model universe. That is, the CA lookup table directly determines only the local space-time rules of
cell interaction and cell modification. Confronted with the behavior that appears within such a
universe over long temporal and spatial scales, computational mechanics attempts to answer the
questions, what are the emergent structures? and what are the emergent physical laws governing their
interactions? The result here of our computational mechanics analysis was a near-complete
particle-level description of ECA 54's space-time behavior. The emergent structures were the regular
domain - a sort of vacuum state - and the fundamental particles - excitations above that ground
state. The laws were expressed in terms of the particle interactions and their properties, including
the statistical features of the short and long term behavior. The collection of these behavioral
components constitutes the "physics" of ECA 54's universe. More concretely, we showed that the
space-time behavior condenses relatively quickly into lhese structures by the emergence time r.
Every site in configurations generated beyond that time participates in one of the identified
structures. There may be, however, compound structures built up out of the fundamental ones. As was
seen in the particle decay statistics, for example, at around 16000 iteralions a scaling regime sets
in, described by the power law decay in a particles. Presumably, this new level 187 of organization
is associated with the appearance of some new mechanism that removes these particles systematically.
Note. Refs. [2-5,17,18] are available via the World Wide Web from the Computational Mechanics
Archive, http://www.santafe.edu/projects/Comp- Mech. Refs. [13,19] are available from the Evolving
Cellular Automata archive, http://www.santafe.edu/ projects/evca. Acknowledgements This research was
supported at the Santa Fe Institute under the Adaptive Computation and External Faculty Programs and
under NSF grant IRI-9320200, DOE grant DE-FG03-94ER25231, and NASA-Ames grant NCC2-840. At the
University of California, Berkeley, it was supported under AFOSR contract 91-0293 and ONR contract
N00014-95-0524. Appendix A. Deterministic equation of motion of the particle-level model In this
appendix, we give the FST for the mapping qb54 defined in Eq. (4), that takes the filtered string z
t = W~54(St) and maps it to the filtered string zt+l = T~54(St+l) ~--- W¡4(~54($t)). The alphabet of
q~54 is ,A p = {0- 8}, though the mapping is defined only over the set [T~54]out, i.e., the set of
possible outputs of the domain filter. For this reason, most states in M(q~54) are lacking edges for
many of the input symbols in A'. The mcachine will be specified by its transition table, which lists
each state and its transitions in the following format: > .state [SinlSout] ~ dest [SinlSout] ~
dest..., where Sin is the input symbol, Sout the output, and dest the destination state, of the
given transition. Optional prefixes > and ¥ indicate that the state is a start state and/or accept
state, respectively. Transitions are listed in order of input symbol. Transitions with no outputs
are indicated by Sour = ~. === page === 188 The start state of M(~54) (state 0) has a self-loop on
input 0, corresponding to a domain input symbol, and eight other edges for the eight different
defect types. Once a nonzero input is read, the machine uses the next six input symbols to
synchronize, finally passing down into its recurrent part, consisting of accept states {45 .....
64}, where it begins writing output symbols. On reaching the end of the CA lattice, the machine
remains in its current state and wraps around to the beginning of the lattice, where it produces
outputs for the input symbols read during synchronization. If the machine is still in state 0 at the
end of the lattice, then an output string zt+t = O N is written. J.E. Hanson, J.P
Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 >0 [01kl~0 [llZ]~l [2lk] --~ 2 [31~.] ~ 3 [4lk] --~ 4 [51k[
~ 5 [6lk] --~ 6 [71~.] ~ 7 [8IX] ~ 8 1 [0rZ] ~ 9 [71k] ~ 10 2 [01k] --+ 11 [61k] ~ 12 3 [01k]--+ 12
[llk]~ 11 4 [01k] --~ 13 [41k] ~ 14 5 [01k] ~ 14 [31,~] ---> 13 6 [01k]~ 15 [2lk]~ 16 7 [01,~] --~
16 [51Z] ~ 15 8 [01k]--~ 10 [81k]~9 9 [01,~]~ 17 [81k]~ 18 10 [0[k]--+ 19 [5lk] ~ 20 11 [01k] ~ 18
[71k] ---> 17 12 [01Z]~20 [21k]~ 19 13 [01k] --> 21 [Ilk[ ~ 22 14 [01k] ~ 23 [4[)~] ~ 24 15 [01k]
---> 24 [31k] --~ 23 16 [01~.] ---> 22 [61)~] --~ 21 17 [01k]~25 [5[k]~26 18 [01~.] --~ 27 [81k] --~
28 19 [0l,k] ~ 29 [61~.] --~ 30 20 [0lk] ~ 31 [31k] -+ 32 21 [0IZ]---> 26 [21~.] ~ 25 22 [01)~] --->
28 [71Z] ---> 27 23 [01Z] ---> 30 [Ilk[ --> 31 24 [01Z] ---> 32 [41k] ~ 34 25 [01k]---> 33 [6IZ]
---> 34 26 [01k] ~ 35 [31Z] ~ 36 27 [0IX[ ~ 37 [5IX[ ~ 38 28 [0l,k] --~ 39 [81x] ~ 40 29 [01L] ~ 40
[71k] ~ 39 30 [0[k] ---> 41 [21k] ~ 42 31 [0IZ] --~ 43 [41~.] ---> 44 32 [0[k] --+ 34 [lik] ~ 33 33
[01k]~45 [71k]~46 34 [01k]--+ 47 [2lk]-+ 48 35 [01k] --~ 49 [41k] ---> 50 36 [01~.] --~ 51 [Ilk[
---> 52 37 [01k]--~ 53 [61;~] --~ 54 38 [01k]~55 [31k]~56 39 [01k]~57 [5lk1~58 40 [0lk] --~ 59 [81k]
~ 60 41 [01k] --~ 61 [31k] ~ 62 42 [01k] ---> 52 [61k] ~ 51 43 [0lk] --~ 54 [Ilk[ --+ 53 44 [0]k]
--~ 63 [41k] ---> 64 ,45 [010] ~ 59 [8101--~ 60 ,46 [013] ---> 57 [5[3] ~ 58 ,47 [0[0] ---> 61 [3181
---> 62 ,48 [010]--~ 52 [618] ~ 51 ,49 [010] ~ 54 [116] ---> 53 ,50 [013] ---> 63 [410] ~ 64 ,51
[018] ~ 47 [218] ~ 48 ,52 [015] ---> 45 [715] ~ 46 ,53 [0101 ~ 45 [7101 ~ 46 ,54 [010] ---> 47 [210]
---> 48 ,55 [012] ~ 49 [410] ~ 50 ,56 [010] ---> 51 [117] ---> 52 ,57 [010] --~ 53 [611[ ~ 54 ,58
[0[0] ~ 55 [311] ~ 56 *59 [OlO] ---> 57 [5101 ~ 58 *60 [014] ~ 59 [814] ~ 60 ,61 [010] ~ 49 [415]
--> 50 *62 [018] ~ 51 [110] ~ 52 *63 [011] ~ 54 [110] ~ 53 *64 [0[0]--~ 63 [414 ]~ 64 References [1]
S. Wolfram, Universality and complexity in cellular automata. Physica D 10 (1984) 1. [2] J.E. Hanson
and J.P. Crutchfield, The attractor-basin portrait of a cellular automaton, J. Stat. Phys. 66 (1992)
1415. === page === J.E. Hanson, J.P. Crutchfield/Physica D 103 (1997) 169-189 189 13] J.P.
Crutchfield and J.E. Hanson, Attractor vicinity decay for a cellular automaton, Chaos 3 (1993) 215.
14] J.P. Crutchfield and J.E. Hanson, Trubulent pattern bases for cellular automata, Physica D 69
(1993) 279. 15] J.E. Hanson, Computational mechanics of cellular automata, Ph.D. Thesis, University
of California, Berkeley (1993). Published by University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, MI. 161 S. Wolfram,
Computation theory of cellular automata, Commun. Math. Phys. 96 (1984) 15. [7] M.G. Nordahl, Formal
languages and finite cellular automata, Complex Systems 3 (1989) 63. I81 K. Culik II, L.P. Hurd and
S. Yu, Computation theoretic aspects of cellular automata, Physica D 45 (1990) 357. 191 K. Lindgren
and M. Nordahl, Universal computation in simple one-dimensional cellular automata, Complex Systems 4
(1990) 299. 10] K. Steiglitz, I. Kamal and A. Watson, Embedding computation in one-dimensional
automata by phase coding solitons, IEEE Trans. Comput. 37 (1988) 138-144. I 1 ] Y. Aizawa, I.
Nishikawa and K. Kaneko, Soliton turbulence in one-dimensional cellular automata, Physica D 45
(1990) 307-327. [12] P. Gacs, Nonergodic one-dimensional media and reliable computation,
Contemporary Mathematics 41 (1985) 125. [131 J.E Crutchfield and M. Mitchell, The evolution of
emergent computation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92 (23) (1995). [14] N. Boccara, J. Nasser and M.
Roger, Particlelike structures and their interactions in spatio-temporal patterns generated by
one-dimenersional deterministic cellular automaton rules, Phys. Rev. A 44 (1991) 866. [15] J.E.
Hopcroft and J.D. Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation
(Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1979). [16] J.E Crutchfield and K. Young, Inferring statistical
complexity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 105. [17] J.E Crutchfield, The calculi of emergence:
Computation, dynamics, and induction, Physica D 75 (1994) 11-54. [18] J.E Crutchfield,
Unreconstructible at any radius, Phys. Lett. A 171 (1992)52-60. I19] R. Das, J.E Crutchfield, M.
Mitchell and J.E. Hanson, Evolving globally synchronized cellular automata, in: Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
on Genetic Algorithms, ed. L.J. Eshelman (Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1995). === page === 
